This is an accompanying github repository for the publication "The spliceosome impacts morphogenesis in the human fungal pathogen Candida albicans" (10.1128/mbio.01535-24). 

At human body temperature, the fungal pathogen Candida albicans can transition from yeast to filamentous morphologies in response to host-relevant cues. Additionally, elevated temperatures encountered during febrile episodes can independently induce C. albicans filamentation. However, the underlying genetic pathways governing this developmental transition in response to elevated temperatures remain largely unexplored. Here, we conducted a functional genomic screen to unravel the genetic mechanisms orchestrating C. albicans filamentation specifically in response to elevated temperature, implicating 45% of genes associated with the spliceosome or pre-mRNA splicing in this process. Employing RNA-Seq to elucidate the relationship between mRNA splicing and filamentation, we identified greater levels of intron retention in filaments compared to yeast, which correlated with reduced expression of the affected genes. Intriguingly, homozygous deletion of a gene encoding a spliceosome component important for filamentation (PRP19) caused even greater levels of intron retention compared with wild type and displayed globally dysregulated gene expression. This suggests that intron retention is a mechanism for fine-tuning gene expression during filamentation, with perturbations of the spliceosome exacerbating this process and blocking filamentation. Overall, this study unveils a novel biological process governing C. albicans filamentation, providing new insights into the complex regulation of this key virulence trait.

This github repository lists all (job) scripts that were used for RNA-seq data processing, mapping and analysis towards mRNA expression and pre-mRNA splicing changes. The sequencing data from this study have been submitted to the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under accession number GSE262764.
